# Chance

A common attack on evolutionary theory is that randomness doesn't bring complexity. If you have a hurricane going through a junk yard you won't end up with a plane. This is true. Randomness doesn't bring complexity. In the next chapter we will address why genetic theory does not build on randomness in that way. The theory we now have on evolution---we have had several in our history, but the one we have right now is the theory of natural selection---does not say that we evolve randomly. The *natural selection* part is important to understand evolution. But this chapter is not about natural selection. This chapter is on the randomness that underlies evolution.

When a mommy and daddy loves each other very much they make a baby. Lets look a little deeper into this. The stork doesn't bring the child, contrary to popular believes, but chemistry and biology happens.

When an egg is fertilised by a sperm this happens: you create a new being by merging two half-cells. The egg provides one set of chromosomes and the sperm provides the other. You get a set of chromosomes from your mother and another from your father. You get 23 in total, but you have two pairs of each. Well, if you are male, you have an X and a Y chromosome, these fellows work a little differently, but as a first approximation, just think of it as a mix of two sets of chromosomes that make you.

It is very likely that this combination of chromosomes never saw the light of day before. Even if you have siblings, they didn't get quite the same chromosomes from your parents. Each of your parents have two sets of those 23 chromosomes but they send them off to you in a random way. They don't pick just the right stuff to send along. It is, as far as we can tell, completely random winch version of their two copies they pass along.

Lets take chromosome one. It is the largest chromosome you have, which is why we call it number one, we order them according to length. Your father gives you one version; your mother gives you one copy. They both have two copies, but the one you get is a random choice between those two. That is how the biological mechanism works. You get random choices of the chromosomes. If you have three siblings, there is a 25% chance that you have your father's chromosome one and your mother's chromosome one. Your siblings have the same random chance, so if there are four of you, there are a good chance that you all have different chromosome ones.

But of course it isn't just chromosome one. You have 23 chromosomes that are a mix of your parents. If you happen to be male you will have received the Y chromosome from your father. That is how that works. That will be a copy of that one chromosome. If you are female you will have a copy of one of your mother's two X chromosomes and a copy of your father's one X chromosome. The sex chromosomes work a little differently; the rest of them you get a random sample of your parents two copies. You have two different copies of your genome; a probably unique combination that hasn't be around ever before.

Something that keeps surprising me, every time I think about it, is the scale of these chromosomes. They are pretty large. One copy of the human genome is about a meter long. There are three billion nucleotides in the human genome, and each takes up a third of a nanometer. That means they are really one meter long, in total. In each of your cells, excluding a few cells that do not actually have the full copy, but that is irrelevant for the amazing story, you have two meters of genetic material. My mind boggles at this. I find it hard to understand, but that apparently is the facts. And amazing facts it is.

Anyway, you have 23 chromosomes, and they get randomly shuffled each generation. That alone makes each child unique. Well, not quite, I must admit. Two to the power of 23 is only about eight millions, so we would see copies if that is all there is to it. It isn't, but that is how the math works. If you only had shuffling around of chromosomes, you would be one out of eight millions. You are much more unique than that, though, because we don't just shuffle around chromosomes.

The chromosomes you get from your parents aren't actually copies of their chromosomes. When your parents created sperm and egg cells they did something amazing. They created new chromosomes from their own two copies. We can't claim to really understand this mechanism, no one really does yet, it is a very active area of research, but we do know that you never get a complete copy of your parent's chromosomes. You get a mix of their chromosomes.

If you want to think about it this way, what you actually get is a mix of your grandparents chromosomes. Your mother and your father got copies---but mixed copies---of their parent's chromosomes. What they pass along to you is a mix of those.

Each chromosome that you receive is actually at mix of at least two chromosomes from your grand parents. The chemistry involved with making sperm and egg sells requires this. You never get a clean copy; you get a mixed copy. Longer chromosomes have more of these, and shorter have less, but they all recombine. That makes the eight million closer to sixteen billion. And that is a low estimate. You really are unique. The combination of chromosomes you have, is likely to have never been around before.

That isn't all, though. To the random shuffling of chromosomes, and the recombination of these, we have to add mutations. Each generations you add mutations. Not the cool kind you see in X-men, but just the everyday variation. To those chromosomes you get from your parents, you add a few mutations. In your genes, you have about 150 new variants that are different from those of your parents.

That might sound like a big number. You have 150 mutations. But keep in mind that this is out of six billion nucleotides. If you wanted to read out the entire code of your genome it would take you a lifetime. If you read one a second and never sleep you would still take 80 years to read it all out. We are dealing with really large numbers here. We mutate a little, but the reproduction mechanism is really amazing.

Anyway, you have a unique combination of chromosomes and on top of that a unique set of mutations. This is the randomness of evolution. Each new person is a completely new combination of genetics. Because of this random shuffling of chromosomes and the random mutations that is added on top of it, evolution never slows down. Each generation is different from the previous.

## Models of evolving populations

It can be really hard to grown an intuition about how this whole thing works, but we do have maths to help us along, to guide our thoughts. We have mathematical models that describe how idealised populations evolve over time. These models are, of course, much simpler than the complex real biology that exists, but they capture various aspects of evolving populations and are tractable to analyse.

One such model is the Wright-Fisher model, named after geneticists Sewall Wright and Ronald Fisher. In this model, we imagine that generations are discrete and do not overlap in time---as you might imagine a population of plants that bloom in the summer, spread their seeds, then die out before the winter and the generation that follows the next summer---and furthermore we imagine that the population is stable in the sense that the size of each generation is the same as the previous. The model does not consider individuals as combinations of different chromosomes and it doesn't consider recombination of chromosomes, but it captures how different variants of genes that compose a population can change over time.

The model works as follows: Imagine you have a big bucket full of differently coloured marbles. Each different colour represent a different genetic variant and each marble a different individual. The whole bucket of marbles represent one generation. To go from one generation to the next, you now do this: you pick a marble in the bucket at random, and not its colour. You can put a marble with the same colour in a new bucket, representing the next generation and you put the marble you picked back into the first bucket. You repeat this until the new bucket has as many marbles as the first bucket.

Since you are not just moving the marbles from one bucket to the next---you are doing what statisticians call sampling with replacement---you new generation is not an exact copy of the previous. The chance that you pick any specific colour from the first bucket is proportional to how many marble there are of that colour. If 10% of the marbles in the first bucket are red, say, then the chance that any marble you put in the second bucket is read is also 10%, but you are picking marbles are random, so the next generation could end up with a few more or a few less red marbles than the previous. If you created lots of "next generation" buckets this way, the average of the next generation's fraction of red marbles would be 10%, but each of the buckets are likely to have a little more or a little less red in them.

How much the next bucket looks like the first depends on how many marbles you have in the bucket to begin with. If there are lots of marbles in the bucket, the next generation bucket will look more like the first generation than if you had few marbles in the bucket. This is just as if you are flipping a coin. If you do it twice you wouldn't be awfully surprised to see two heads, but if you flip a coin thousand of times you would be very surprised if you end up with only heads. When you flip a coin, you would expect, on average, to get as many heads as tails, but with only a few flips you could get more heads than tails or vice versa. Similarly, when you pick coloured marbles at random, you would expect the the new bucket to have roughly as many marbles of each colour as the first bucket if you picked lots of marbles, but you wouldn't be awfully surprised if the fraction of marbles of each colour to be different if you only pick a few marbles.

How much a population changes from one generation to the next depends on how many individuals there are in the population. Small populations---buckets with a few marbles---changes more from one generation to the next, when we consider the composition of different colours, than larger populations do. The size of a generation is thus a key parameter for how fast the genetic composition of a population changes. For the Wright-Fisher model, the number of marbles is the population size, and it doesn't change from one generation to the next, but the speed at which the genetic composition changes depends on this population size. Other models of populations have different rules for how to compose future generations over time, but the speed at which populations change their genes can often be reduced to how fast a similar Wright-Fisher model would change. When we can do this, we would say that the other model has the same "effective population size" as the Wright-Fisher model that evolves at the same speed as the other model does.

You model generations in the Wright-Fisher buckets by repeating the process for as many generations as you want. You create the second generation bucket by sampling marble colours from the first generation, then you sample the third generation by picking colours the same way starting with the second bucket instead of the first, and the fourth generation you create by sampling marbles from the third bucket, and so on. In each step in this process, you would on average expect the fraction of marbles with each colour to remain the same, but because you are sampling at random, the fractions end up changing over time. How much you change these fractions from one generation to the next is inversely proportional to the size of each generation; if your population is increased by a factor of two, it takes twice as long to see the same amount of change.

> Insert an example here.

How fast the population changes over time is determined by the effective population size, and if you read the genetics literature you will see many references to the effective population size. When you do, it usually just refers to how fast a population changes, but it is a little misleading to reduce this speed of change to a single parameter, although it is often done. The effective population size is a measure of the speed of change in the Wright-Fisher model, but if you change your model just a little, the speed of change becomes a more dynamic property of the model that doesn't necessarily maps cleanly into a single parameter.

If we imagine a Wright-Fisher model with a slight modification, we can see how this works. We can imagine running the Wright-Fisher model for ten generation with a population size of 1000, then five generations where we reduce the generation size to 100, and then another ten generations with a population size of 1000. Because we are changing the population size in the 25 generations we consider, it isn't a clean Wright-Fisher model, but we can consider how fast the population changes over the 25 times. It is just that the population will change relatively slowly in the first and last ten generations in this example, but in the middle five generations the change per generation will be ten times as large as in the beginning and end phase of the process. We *can* replace the process with a population bottleneck in the middle with a Wright-Fisher model with a constant population size and get an effective population size that corresponds to the bottleneck model, but the dynamics of that model would be different.

For modern humans, we often estimate that the effective population size is relatively small. About 10,000-20,000 individuals is what we would need to get the genetic variation we see in modern humans today, despite there being more than seven billion humans around. We have very little genetic variation in modern humans because we are a relatively young species, but if we just reduce humanity to a Wright-Fisher model we loose a lot of information about how we actually evolve and evolved. The small effective population size we have today is a historical accident. It is only small because we consider a long time period when we look at all the genetic variation around today and see it is very small. In actuality, it means that early human populations changes fast, but today, with billions of people, we actually change very slow. If we consider the last 1000 years, we change gene frequencies slowly; if we consider the last 100,000 years, we have changed gene frequencies fast. We used to have a small effective population size; now we have a large effective population size. The genetic variation we have today stretches back a couple of million years, and the average effective population size over that long period is small, but it isn't any longer. The speed at which humanity changes its genetic composition at random is slowing down as the population size increases. Interestingly, though, the speed at which we can adapt to our environment is speeding up, but that is the topic of the next chapter.

If we only consider random changes to the genetic composition of a population, we get two observations from the Wright-Fisher model: the genetic composition of a population will change over time because of random sampling from one generation to the next, and the speed at which a population changes is inversely proportional to how many individuals the population holds. For humanity, it tells us that the evolution might have slowed down, at least if we only consider random changes over time, but also that we haven't done away with evolution as long as there is genetic variation in the species. As long as there are differently coloured marbles in the buckets, the fractions of different colours will change over time.

In the simple model, we just sample marbles, so we start out with the colours we have in the first bucket, and change the frequencies of these over following generations. Each generation, there is a chance that some colours will be completely lost. If we never sample a rare colour when we create a new generation, that colour will not make it into the next bucket, and we thus cannot sample it in future generations. Genetic variation is lost over time, and if we do not introduce new variation in some way, we will eventually end up with only one colour in our buckets. Once we get there, the population will be stuck with that colour for all future generations. That colour would be fixed for the population and all other colours would be lost.

Mutations is what prevents this from happening. We can add mutations to the Wright-Fisher model thus: whenever we sample a marble there is a slight chance that we do not put, into the new bucket, the exact colour we picked. Instead, we could throw in a different colour, perhaps a colour we haven't ever seen before.

Mutations are rare. The chemistry that copies our DNA from one generation to the next is amazing at preventing changes---far superior to any copying mechanism that we humans have ever invented---but with billions of nucleotides in our genome, a few changes are introduced each generation nevertheless. In the Wright-Fisher model we can model mutations by having a slight probability that when we sample a colour from the previous generation bucket we actually put into the next generation bucket a different coloured marble. If you run the Wright-Fisher model long enough, you reach an equilibrium where the new colours you introduce as mutations matches the colours that are lost to random sampling, and the number of different colours you see in each bucket reflects that. The speed at which the different colours change over time is inversely proportional to the population size, but the speed at which new mutations enter the population is proportional to the population size---each time you sample a new marble there is the same chance that you introduce a mutation---so the two terms cancel out and you reach an equilibrium.

For humanity, this means that in the past when there were few humans around, we had few new mutations each generation, but these were lost or fixated relatively quickly; today, when there are billions of humans around, it takes a long time for variants to get lost or fixed, but we introduce more new mutations each generation as well.



